# IRENE-3

IRENE-3 is a decompilation tool that ties together Anvill, Remill, Rellic, and Ghidra to create an interface for defining binary patches directly in Ghidra. Patch definitions 
localize user desired semantics to an exact region within the target binary. The user edits decompilation of patch region to define a patch in C. A patch definition generated by the Ghidra plugin contains the new user provided semantics for the region along with the region's location and variable information. 

The user can also define smaller patch regions in order to create smaller sub-block patches.


Goals
* Decompile "patch regions" accurately, recording all assumptions the decompiler makes about the state of the program at entry and exit to the region.
* Provide high-level C-like output for patch regions while remaining localizable
* Communicate user semantics and patch context to patch compilers in a convenient format
* Provide as many features as possible directly in Ghidra 

Anti-Goals
* Full Binary Recompilation
* Provide UI components outside of Ghidra
* Global analysis capabilities of decompilation or lifting (analysis should be local to a patch region after committing to that region's assumptions)
  
## Repository Layout

* `irene-ghidra` a Ghidra plugin for exporting first layer specifications from Ghidra to bootstrap decompilation.
* `bin` contains C++ code for different binary utilities
* `lib` contains C++ code for the library
* `include` contains public headers for the library
* `scripts` contains miscellaneous scripts for installing prerequisites and running tests
* `cmake` contains CMake helpers

## Installing IRENE from a Release

Please see the [installation instructions](INSTALL.md)

## IRENE Build Instructions (Docker)

### Building and Installing the Ghidra Plugin

Set your Ghidra path either by updating GHIDRA_INSTALL_DIR in gradle.properties or set the environment variable then run:
```
just install-irene3-ghidra
```

### Build Docker Image

```sh
just build-docker
```

### Decompile a test specification to C
```sh
docker run irene3:latest \
    /opt/trailofbits/bin/irene3-server --help
```

## IRENE Usage Instructions

Usage directions are located [here](USAGE.md).

## IRENE Build Instructions (Native)

#### Install prerequisites
```sh
./scripts/install-prereqs.sh
just install-prereqs
```
### Build + Install IRENE3
```sh
just install-irene3
```
### Verify Installation
To verify installation worked, first we run the unit tests:
```sh
# test the IRENE3 Ghidra Plugin
just test-irene3-ghidra

# test the C++ Decompilation Portion
just test-irene3-cpp
```

### Decompile a Binary to C
```sh
just decompile-binary ./tests/bins/test-hello-elf-x64 o.c
just decompile-binary-ll ./tests/bins/test-hello-elf-x64 o.ll
just decompile-spec ./tests/specs/test-hello-elf-x64.spec.json o.c
just decompile-spec-ll ./tests/specs/test-hello-elf-x64.spec.json o.ll
```

## IRENE Ghidra Development Instructions

Install `just` with `brew install just` and get a copy of Ghidra (Currently 10.1.5) from [Ghidra Releases](https://github.com/NationalSecurityAgency/ghidra/releases)

Then add `gradle.properties` to the assume unchanged list with `git update-index --assume-unchanged gradle.properties`

Afterwards you can modify `gradle.properties` with the path to your Ghidra install without having those changes pushed to main.

You can also set the `GHIDRA_INSTALL_DIR` environment variable, but your IDE may not recognize the environment variable. 

`just test-irene3-ghidra` will run the unit tests for the plugin. 

Provided your `gradle.properties` file is up to date any Scala IDE should work without any setup. Given the mixing of Java and Scala an IDE that supports both is ideal. VScode with Metals + the Java extension pack works well. 

### MacOS Instructions
```sh
brew tap homebrew/cask-versions
brew install --cask temurin17
```

## IRENE C++ Development Instructions

* Run `./scripts/install-prereqs.sh` to install `just`
* Install the rest of the dependencies with `just install-prereqs`
* Install BinaryNinja and install it to the `python3` path
* (Optional) Set path to `CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX` in `.env`, this determines where the compiled artifacts will be installed to
* (M1 Only) Set path to `VCPKG_ROOT` to compiled `cxx-common`
* Build and install IRENE3 `just install-irene3`

`just build-irene3-cpp` will compile the C++ project
`just install-irene3-cpp` will compile and install the C++ project to `./install/bin` the specified install prefix
`just test-irene3-cpp` will do a simple test for output on some sample specifications and a simple roundtrip test

## Acknowledgements:
This research was developed with funding from the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA). The views, opinions, and/or findings
contained in this material are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as representing the official views or policies of the Department
of Defense or the U.S. Government.

Distribution Statement A – Approved for Public Release, Distribution Unlimited